Hi, this is Scott. I
really appreciate our sponsors because
they make the show possible.
Today's show is sponsored by
developer express, become a UI
superhero with dev express controls
and libraries. Deliver elegant.net solutions
that address customer needs today
by leveraging your existing knowledge,
you can build next generation
touch enabled solutions for tomorrow,
you can download your free
30 day trial@dxdothanselminutes.com. That's dx.hanselminutes.com
from Hanselman it's dot com.
It's Hansel minutes. Oh, weekly
discussion with web developer and
technologist Scott Hanselman. This is
Lawrence Ryan announcing show number four
20. In this episode, Scott
talks with Denise Jacobs about hacking
the creative mind. Hi, this
is Scott Hanselman. This is
another episode of Hansel minutes,
and I'm here in Orlando,
Florida at the angle brackets
conference, and I've just come
out of Denise Jacobs creativity presentation.
What was the title of
your presentation? It was called
the art of disciplined creativity.
I like that because for
me, creative means a little
kind of, and with all
due respect, Kind of woo,
you know, like loosey goosey,
just like waiting for inspiration,
But you said disciplined creativity.
And that's why you got
a room of programmers exactly.
To sit and listen to
a creativity talk and people
kept coming up afterwards and
like, this was, it was
eye opening. It was great.
It was great discipline creativity.
What is that? Well, I
like to think of creativity
as this thing that, you
know, a lot of people
have this concept that it
is this Lucy goosey, you
know, wait for inspiration, very
free flowing, nebulous, tenuous kind
of process. And really, when
you think about it, most
people who are creatives, professional
creatives, most of the time,
what comes to mind are
artists and musicians. And even,
I like to think I
liken people who are athletes
and like martial artists and
things like that. All of
these people have to do
their creative discipline or have
to do their discipline regularly.
Like, that's why it's a
discipline, right? It's not like
a painter, like Picasso, for
example, didn't just paint when
he felt like it, he
painted every day, right? Somebody
like a musician goes into
the studio every day. They
don't just like, Oh, I
just got a song. They
go and they practice. And
if they don't have a
song, then they practice on
things that they, that they
do. Right. But from my
perspective, as a reasonably non-creative
person, I just assume that
like, Rihanna just hangs out
and awesome and spends money.
Right. And then has an
idea and then rushes in.
I just assume that that's
how it works. I would
argue that that's probably not
how it works, right? Like,
or the people who are
in her band, or if
she's writing the music herself
or the songs herself or
the people who are writing
the songs for, they're probably
there with a little tiny,
you know, tidbit of an
idea. And then they're working
the idea they're going in
and they're gathering things and
they're playing with it. And
they're really kind of honing
the idea. So similarly for
people who are programmers, people
who are doing things that
most people would consider more
logical or analytical things like
scientists and whatnot, same thing.
You're sitting down at the
computer, you're trying to work
the problem. You're trying to
find a solution. You're trying
to put, you're putting things
together. Then you do that
regularly. And that's how you
become a really good programmer.
That's how you become a
really good developer is that
you are constantly pulling in
different kinds of modalities, different
kinds of no, you really
understand your language. And then
you can really work the
problem and find solutions through
that. So back to your
original question, then the discipline
is that showing up every
day, that kind of commitment
to it. And that kind
of exercising, basically your kind
of creativity, muscles and exercising
those, those skills so that
you get to a place
where you can be like
the Michael Jordan of, Well, like
I always think of Prince,
right? It's like this legend
that Prince has like a
thousand songs that he's written
that he hasn't given anyone
yet. And it just, he's
just sitting on them Chillin.
Right. And he probably has
a thousand more that come
to him, you know, depending
on who inspires him or
what inspires him at the
time. Like I remember there
was the one I don't
remember which song it was,
but there's one song that
has when he had the
baby. And there was like
the baby's heartbeat in the
background. And I mean, it's
inspired, right? It's inspired. Same
thing. Isn't she lovely by
Stevie wonder, totally inspired by
his daughter when his daughter
was born. I know tons
of people when they become
parents, for example, have those,
those kinds of things. But
I'm hearing you say that
when the inspiration comes, if
you haven't got the muscle
ready to answer that inspiration
and make it happen, then
that's going to be a
problem. Well, I think that
it is it's, it's kind
of the same thing. If
you decide all of a
sudden, you want to like,
you know, run a marathon,
but you, but you've been
sitting on the couch, chilling,
watching scandal or something. What?
I just read your blog.
That's a really, that's a
really good analogy though. Right?
Like may very well have
the inspiration to run a
marathon, right. Or walk a
half marathon. But yeah, if
you're right, if I'm not
exercising, it's not going to
happen. But the thing is
is that you can easily
change that, right? Like, you
know, there's, there's the couch
to five K you know,
a website and everything. I
mean, there's different ways. It's,
it's not like you're going
to get up and you're
going to start running, but
you do start instilling the
practice and you make it
regular and you make it
a habit. And then the
next thing you know, you
are running 5k, you're running
10 K, you're running a
half marathon. You're running a
full marathon. So how do
I couch to five K
the creativity. I love that.
I use that. No, I
love that. So that's my
trademark that just, I know.
Right. And you're like, and
I get kickbacks for that.
Thank you. Make that happen
by the time, by the
time we publish that, I
expect a blog post from
you on catch the five
K to creative mind. I
love that though. That's great.
I'm I'm so going to
use that. So couch to
five K for creativity. So
basically one of the things
that I talk about in
my presentations and also in
my workshop, I have two
workshops that I do. One
called get unblocked and another
one called hacking the creative
brain more for people like
programmers and developers. But one
of the things that I
talk about is like, first,
you have to know what
it is. Be aware of
the things you need to
eliminate. So for example, if
you were couch to five
care, right, the couch five
K to creativity is like,
okay, well, you're not going
to want to sit on
the couch and watch TV
all night. If you want
to start running a marathon,
right? Same thing with cure
creativity. There are things that
you're going to have to
give up. You're probably going
to have to give up
the potato chips. You're probably
going to have to give
up the sodas. So similarly,
what I recommend with people
is to start actually having
some awareness about their habits,
how are they managed spending
their time? How are they
managing, or just being wrapped
up in distractions, multitasking, communication,
addiction, things like that, being
aware of that so that
you can start changing your
behaviors around those, around those
things and start eliminating them
so that that's not taking
up your time then to
start replacing those habits with
ways of managing time better
so that you can get
things off of your plate,
kind of get the things
done that need to get
done so that you can
start having more free time.
That will be kind of
devoted towards create creative pursuits
or creative thinking. I actually
have a talk that's called
white space creativity. That talks
about a lot of things
of not doing a lot
of what happens with creativity
is, is not when you're
actually sitting down and concentrating.
But it's the times between
when you're doing stuff, right.
It's when you're taking the
walk, when you're taking the
shower, when you're about to
go to sleep. So it's
quieting the mind. So it's
quieting the mind. And so
a lot of the process
is to start creating the
habit of quieting the mind,
right? And that's, and that
again also is discipline, right?
A lot of practices and
whatnot have to do with,
you know, slowing down, slowing
down thoughts, dismissing thoughts so
that your brain just has
that kind of free space.
Is that a known thing
is a, is there a
science behind the idea that
a quiet mind is one
that is open to inspiration?
Cause absolutely. In my industry,
everyone is when you were
in my industry, when you
were CSS and design and
web programmer, until you moved
into the creativity space. So
you know, this as much
as anyone we're habitually busy,
indiscriminately busy, it's hard for
inspiration to find its way
in when you're pulling to
refresh. Always. Yeah. Yeah. And
when you're being inpatient, when
that, when the refresh takes
too long, like what's wrong
with us, you're pressing the
button and then that gets
you tense and everything. But
there's a lot of, a
lot of studies, a lot
of support. And Is there
a science behind this? There's
a lot of science. Thank
you. That's the word I
was looking for? Like your
brainwaves Brainwaves, the different brainwave
modes, alpha brainwave mode, which
is kind of the, the
mode that your brain goes
into before you're going to
sleep when you're in the
shower, when you're taking a
nice, relaxed walk, sometimes when
you're like playing with a
pet, you know, that sort
of thing that has actually
been proven to be, I
like to call it the
gateway to creativity, but that's
usually what people refer to
as the creative mind. And
that sort of thing is
that. But it's also been
shown that like actually in
terms of on a neurological
level, like your, your, the
electric electric signals that go
on in your brain actually
flow more freely when you're
in, when your brain is
in alpha brainwave mode, When
your brain is relaxed. So
that, that is relaxation. Is
that what the layman's term
of that and your now
I think it's, I think
it's not so much chill.
It's more of being able
to kind of regulate your
brain, right? Like you can
be deeply immersed in something
and you can still have,
your brain can still be
relaxed, right? Like your brain
can be working and be
processing things, but it can
still be relaxed. I'm thinking
of things like woodworking. I
find to be like more
relaxing than programming. Like I
don't think necessarily think of
programming as being a relaxing.
Right. But for some people
I actually know that some
people do program and it's,
it's kind of relaxing for
them. Their brain gets into
a certain, gets into a
flow state, for example. And
then the ideas and everything
are just really coming to
you easily woodworking happens that
way too, but you're still
problem solving during woodworking, right?
Like even though it's not
the same as, you know,
trying to write a program
or trying to write an
application, you are trying to
accomplish something and you do
have a certain set of
tasks and you do need
to know kind of the
limits and the parameters of
what you're doing within that
Task set. Yup. That's true.
And that's true of anything,
right. But that's kind of
mastery is, is kind of
knowing the kind of range
of all the things that
can happen. And then knowing
kind of having the, the,
the trust or the faith
that you know, how to
deal with anything that comes
up. And I think that's
in a lot of ways,
that's creativity, that's actually creative.
Confidence is one of the
things is knowing that if
you get into a situation,
David Kelly wrote a book, David
and his brother, Tom Kelly
wrote a book called creative
confidence. And they basically talk
about this whole process. But
that creative confidence is this
capacity that you know, that
if you come up in
a situation where you need
to come up with a
solution, that you have a
methodology and a set of
tools and a practice that
will enable you to come
up with something that, that
you haven't come up with
before and nobody else has
come up with. I see.
So if you're a beginning
violinist, you're going to be
struggling with the actual movement
of your hands and your
brain. Isn't freed up for
creativity. But if you've been
done, you're done your 10,000
hours, right. That part of
your brain is now freed
up. Exactly. And then you
can start to play with
the limitations. So you can
play at work within the
constraints, right? Like there's, there's
only, there is a limited
number of ways that your,
your fingers can move. But
within that limit of number
of ways, there's kind of
almost like infinite ways that
the notes can combine and
how they can work together.
And that's when people have
the mastery, that's when they
get into flow, that's when
they feel like they've been
taken over. And they're just
kind of a channel a
lot of times for creativity
and creative ideas. That's interesting.
You know, it makes me
think about the, the movement
towards doing polyglot programming. A
lot of people are saying,
you need to learn more
than one language. You got
to exercise that brain. Like
I'm guilty of really focusing
on C sharp is my
favorite language. But other people
are saying, try to learn
a new language every year.
I tried that for awhile.
Shall that workout for you?
It was hard. Really? What
was hard? What was the
hard part? It was like
writing with your nondominant hand.
You know what I mean?
It's like, I can do
it, but it wasn't. And
it wasn't, and it didn't
flow. Well, it's almost like,
you know, like, Hey, you're
going right.  on your
keyboard now. It's just like,
everyone's swears you had to
do it for two weeks.
And then you're going to
be a faster typist, but
you gotta make it for
those two weeks. I assume
that getting my brain in
a creative mode is not
going to happen overnight. Doesn't
happen overnight. But here's the
thing that I often like
to kind of, you know,
I like to encourage people
with around creativity. We're all
born creative. We come out
of the box creative, right?
Like if any, look at
any child and you will
see any child doing something
completely innovative, creative, making something
out of nothing, imaginary friends,
playing games that never been
played before, you know, being
able to make use of
the things around them to
make something fun and interesting.
Seeing the world through different
eyes and through, you know,
three different in different ways.
We all are born that
way. We get it taught
out of us. We get,
we become like kind of
already intact and we get
broken. Right. So this is
kind of, I always tell
people, you've already got this.
You're just getting back in
touch with it. Right. So
getting kind of into that,
that mode is, first of
all, I think it's easier
when you realize you've already
been there and you're just
getting back to something that
was already there. The number
one, and then number two,
when you realize that it
also has to do with,
it's not pushing for something
or forcing for something, it's
more of getting rid of
things. It's more of getting
things out of the way.
So that, that this natural
flow process can happen. It's,
it's almost as if, you
know, your creativity has been
damned by like beavers, you
know, like there's a Beaver's
dam in the, in the
path of this free-flowing Creek,
right? And if you get
rid of the dam, then
you can start, you can
start, you can get the
dam on blocked basically. Then
you can start to have
creativity flow. It's a really
interesting way to look at
it. And that kind of
throws a wrench in my
violinist analogy, because in that
example, you're trying to learn
skills you do not have,
but what you're describing is
you just need to chip
away at these bad habits
that you've learned and get
back to that childlike state.
The thing is, is that
it's within that, right? It's,
it's kind of within building
these skills, it's kind of
a strange kind of a
paradox in a way, right?
Like a violinist is not
going to just pick up
a violin and just know
how to do all of
the movements and know how
to hold the bow and
how to, you know, stroke
the string in a certain
way. Like you have to
learn all of that. Those
are skills too, but it's
kind of a combination of
these skills. Plus this kind
of innate creative ability. Once
the skill level gets to
a certain point, then that
innate creativity can start flowing.
Did you do have to
build up the skills? Like
the same thing? I always,
like I was talking about
Michael Jordan or LeBron James, or,
you know, any, you know,
put in any great basketball
player, any great athlete, tiger
woods, whatever. Like these people
had to practice over, started
at a very young age,
every day, practicing and practicing.
But then after a certain
point, when it stops being
so conscious, such conscious effort,
then that kind of, that
kind of, you know, secondary,
not actually, it's kind of
like the subconscious like that
can take over and then
the creativity can start flowing,
right? There's this great book
that I've been reading, I've
been recommending it to everybody.
Cause I just love it.
It's called the inner game
of work and it's by
Timothy Galloway. And he talks about
how, what ends up happening.
A lot of times, he
actually originally was a tennis
instructor. And then he started
applying his inner game of
tennis to work and other
things. And one of the
things that he says is
there. So you kind of
have like a self one,
which is like the critical
self and the teaching self
and everything. And then you
have the self too, which
is like the subconscious, which
sees everything, knows everything, gets
everything all the time. What
happens a lot of times
is when you're trying to
do something, the self one
takes over and starts criticizing
and doing this and stuff
and self too knows exactly
what to do. Right. So
if you can get that
self one to kind of
quiet down and shut up
and you can talk, think
that self one is off
your critical mind, whatever. And
then self too, is this
kind of subconscious kind of
creative place. If you can
get cell phone to shut
up and let self to
do its thing, then you
can actually do awesome things.
So self number one in
using his terms is the,
is the one that says
you're an imposter. And everyone's
going to figure out that
you don't belong here. Right.
Then you don't know what
you're doing and you're doing
it wrong. And how could
you, and you made a
mistake and Oh my God.
And she says, Oh, you
know, that's self one right
now. Just do it faster,
harder, the higher With the
idea that somehow we can
just muscle our way through
this stuff. You know, I
talk about this in my
productivity. Talk, the idea that
hope is not a strategy.
Hope is not as strategy,
but practice is right. Showing
up is, and even practicing
shutting that self one up,
you know, practicing, shutting up
that critical mind. And that's
actually another thing that I
really put a lot of
focus on. I wrote a,
an article on a list
of part a couple of
years back called banishing your
inner critic. And I talk
about like some, you know,
give some very good, in
my opinion, of course I'm
biased, right? He wrote it.
What can I say? But
I give some, you know,
some really good solid advice
and suggestions on how you
can actually deal with your
inner critic and deal with
those inner critical voices to
kind of shut them up
so that you can create
more into them. Yeah. It's
amazing how many people don't
recognize that this is the
case. That, that is that
exists. Like when I talked,
I did a show with
a very famous programmer named
John skeet, who is number
one on stack overflow, nice.
Number one. And we had
an entire show about how
we both feel like phonemes
and everyone's like, that's insane.
And like, everyone feels like
that. You know what I
mean? Like I hope, I
hope that everyone, the president
should feel like that because
it should be a motivating.
It shouldn't be an oppressive
thing. It should be acknowledge
it, recognize it, store it,
and then use it to
push you forward. But I
think what ends up happening
is that it becomes paralyzing
right? For a lot of
people. I think for most
people, sometimes it becomes a
motivating factor and other times
it becomes an absolute, absolutely
paralyzing factor. And so, and
for me, like, that's what
I'm most concerned with because
that's what I've experienced in
my life. I have those
moments where I'm like, Oh
my God, somebody is going
to figure it out. I
don't know what I'm doing.
I dunno know, I'm trying
to figure this all out.
And that, that means I
should stop instead of meet
somehow, meaning that means I
should push forward. I should
keep going or should learn
more and ask more. I
have a, I'm a, I'm
a, I'm a recovering perfectionist.
And, and the recovery process
is, is being as bumpy.
Well, I assume you're always
a perfectionist. You can't stop
that. You just have to.
Well, but I, but I
think some of it is
it's, it's learned habits. Right.
And so I'm trying to
unlearn some of those habits
or most of them. And
one of the things about
being a perfectionist is that,
you know, everything has to,
you, you have to do
everything perfectly the first time.
Like there's no room for
mistakes, there's no room for
like, I didn't do it.
Right. And that's okay. It's
like, how could you have
not known that I did
this when I was in
elementary school? Everyone's like, you
know, well you have to
write a draft and then
you revise the traffic. No,
no. You just write it
right the first time. Right?
Like who writes the first
draft? What's that? What's that
I remember the first time
I found a typo in
a book and I was
mortified. I was like, no,
but books are perfect. I
mean, they're printed and, and
they're perfect. I, I, I
couldn't believe that there would
be a book that would
have a typographic error in
it. And after that, I
was just like, wow. I
mean, it really changed how
I perceived the world, you
know, but I mean, you
can take that and apply
it to your own life
and think, I just, I
can't make any mistakes. And,
but then, then you can't
move forward. Right. If you
just think that it's always,
somebody's going to find you
out, if you make mistakes
and he's going to find
you out. And so yeah.
All of those problems for
creativity, right? Cause part of
creativity is the process of
discovery is the process of
finding things out. It's the
process of playing with things
and, and curiosity, and seeing
what happens next and how
does this work together? And
these two things have never
been associated before. What happens
when we do this? And
if you're so concerned with
failure or looking bad, or
having somebody call you out
and as an imposter or
something that you're never going
to be able to get
anything done with that stuff,
That idea of looking bad,
that's a really important, I
try to get people involved
in open source and trying
to plug things together, taking
two things and plugging them
together. And it always seems
like we see projects that,
you know, someone took this
and that had an Nintendo
emulator and a Java script.
And then, and it worked.
It's like, that's amazing, but
we didn't see the 20
failures behind that, that, that
person didn't put out into
the world. We just see
the one amazing thing. And
then we feel inadequate. Right?
I think that people should
lean into that public failure.
Right. And I agree with
you. And I was going
to say that another part
of the inner critic and
imposter syndrome and all that
stuff is comparing yourself to
other people, comparing your process
to somebody's finished product and
somehow finding yourself, you know,
unworthy or fly, falling short
because you're falling. You're, you're
comparing all, you know, all
of the things that you've
gone through and all the
failures and all of the
things that didn't quite work.
And yet you're looking at
this, the other person had
the whole exact same thing.
Right? One of the things
though that you said at
the beginning, and you mentioned
also about sports is this
idea of showing up and
discipline. And that reminds me
of the things that I
talk about and productivity that
you're, you need to be
productive by getting the aspects
of your life that are,
that making good use of
time in order to free
up time to be, be
creative, Right. Or PR be
productive is like your main
focus. Right. And, but I
would say, and I would,
so yes, to be creative,
I feel like productivity and
creativity actually do go hand
in hand, right? They do
have this relationship with each
other. And I like you,
I actually promote a lot
of productivity practices in order
to help people get all
of that stuff off of
their plate. That's been taking
up mental space, right. In
order for them to be
able to devote that mental
space towards something, that's going
to be much more fulfilling,
like being creative in some
way, shape or form. Right.
And I don't mean when
I say being creative, I
don't mean that all of
a sudden you're going to
paint a Tableau or, you
know, write in an Uber
or, or, you know, right.
The great next great American
novel. I mean, being creative
could be, it could be
developing an app Or solving
a problem at work, Solving
a problem at work. It
could be creating a meetup.
It could be creating a
social environment. It could be
making, it's making, it's creating
something that has never, that
doesn't didn't exist before and
bringing it into existence, whatever
that thing is. Right. So,
yeah, I think it is
really important to be able
to get a handle on
time, to be really cognizant
of the places where you're
spending time so that you
can start making choices on.
Do I want to spend
time on this or do
I want to spend time
on that exactly. Right. And
you can start, the more
aware you are and the
more you're kind of in
control of how that's working,
the more than you can
start spending your time on
the things that actually really
feed a nerd. Yeah. Yeah.
I was, I saw, I
think go on around the
internet recently, which was basically
a clock in the shape
of a pie chart and
it encouraged you to just
shade in, you know, work
time, personal time, family time,
you just get a sense
of what is the pie
chart of your 24 hour
a day look like? And
if there's things you can
do that are, that are
no fun or rote things
or things you combine like
working out, that could be
a thing that you need
to do and TV something
that you enjoy doing. Can
you work out and watch
TV at the same time
and then free up that
pie chart, just downtime scheduled,
doing nothing time meditation. I
know you're really big into
meditation and you know, I'm
really big into meditation, but
the thing that's, I think
that's the, the irony of
it is that I think
in a lot of ways
people keep themselves occupied because
they're frightened of what will
happen if they don't right.
Brain exploded. Right. Absolutely. Yeah.
Right. And it's what I
do with the downtown, The
downtime. And, and I don't
think a lot of people
actually think about what is
meaningful in their lives and
how they actually want to
contribute to the world. Right.
It's much easier to think.
Gotta make the donuts, got
to just go to work.
Right? Yeah. That's a great
reference. I don't think that
necessarily everyone who's not from
the States will get that,
but there was this man
in the commercials in the
seventies and eighties who would
wake up every morning and
he'd look at his alarm
and he'd go time to
make the donuts. I think
we all feel like that
sometimes our jobs sometimes. But
I feel like when you
start doing, when you start
doing things that are more
meaningful than you don't feel
like it's time to make
the donuts, right. You don't
feel like, okay, I just
gotta go and put in
my time. And then later
on, you know, there's this
little meme that's been going
around Facebook and the web
and everything, and it's really
more focused for the United States,
but that it says, you
know, are you getting up
to go to work, to
work at the job so
that you can pay for
the house and the drive,
the car that you never
drive, that you're never in
because you're at the job,
you know, et cetera, et
cetera. And when you start
doing things that are Laden
with meaning and, and my,
really my, my main thrust
and my main kind of
goal with getting people focused
and in touch with their
creativity again, is because when
you do creative pursuits, when
you express your creativity, that
a lot of times is
when you start to get
in touch with meaning. That's
in touch with joy. That's
when you start to get
in touch with your passion
and, and feeling actually really
alive. And that's really what
I'm trying to get people
in touch with. And when
you're feeling alive and you're
feeling a passion, then you
also, a lot of times
want to make something you
want to make a difference,
right? You want to make
something that's meaningful, that that
touches other people and stuff.
And that's really what I'm
working to get people to
do and working people to
get in touch with so
that they have more meaningful
kind of fulfill lives for
themselves. And that they're probably
making a positive difference in
other people's lives as well.
Definitely. And where can people
learn about you and read
about your articles and see
videos of you online? You
can go to Denise jacobs.com.
I am just actually putting
on a new section of
my website, which is going
to be Denise Jacob's dot
com slash videos. And you
can go to nice jacobs.com/writing
for books that I've written
articles that I've written and
things that are coming. Very
cool. And then you also
are available to do workshops
and come to corporations and
things like that, and talk
about Absolutely. And come and
do talks at your conferences.
You're going to be at
in Oslo. Are you not?
I'm going to be At
NDC Oslo in June, and
I actually will be doing
my hacking the creative brain
workshop on June 3rd. I believe
so, if you're interested, you
should check that out. I'll
also after Oslo, I'll be
in Poland, in Krakow at
the 33rd degree conference, and
then got some S some
more conferences coming up in
August and September. So it's
going to be a nice
busy year. Cool. Congratulations. This
has been another episode of
Hansel minutes, and we'll see
you again next week.